is Israel obstructing a deliveries to
Gaza the UN says Palestinians there are
on the brink of starvation that's even
after the international court of justice
ordered Israel to allow humanitarian
assistance into the trip so who can
force it to comply this is Inside
Story
[Music]
hello welcome to the program I am Hashim
aala the United Nations is warning that
Gaza is on the brink of famine Israel is
accused of preventing humanitarian aid
from reaching Palestinians and unra the
main UN agency operating in the strip
may be forced to stop all its operations
unless donor Nations that suspended
funding resume their contri
contributions all this comes just weeks
after the international court of justice
ordered Israel to allow and I quote
urgently needed basic services and
humanitarian assistance into the strip
so what if anything can be done to force
Israel to comply with the ruling there's
plenty to discuss with our guests but
first this report looks at the situation
on the ground in
Gaza Palestinians in Gaza are living in
Desperate conditions
the children of North Gaza are dying of
hunger there is no milk for them there
is no sugar for them there is no rice
for them there is no flour for them
hunger is killing us I ate only little
pieces of bread today we are reduced to
eating
grass on January the 26th the
international court of justice ordered
Israel to take immediate steps to enable
the provision of urgently needed basic
services and humanitarian assistance
into Gaza but those living inside the
territory say the ruling is little more
than empty
words there's nothing except Shing and
bombardment and hunger my children cry
because they are hungry we did not
receive any humanitarian Aid a day after
the Court's decision Israel accused 12
employees of the UN Agency for
Palestinian refugees Ana of taking part
in Hamas attacks on Southern Israel in
October the staff were fired and an
investigation was opened but it wasn't
enough to reassure some donor Nations
about 20 countries have suspended
funding to unoa or said that they would
reassess future pledges the UN agency
has warned it may not be able to
continue its work after the end of
February which would cut the only
Lifeline to millions of
Palestinians if the Palestinian people
lose un's assistance were As Good As
Dead As Good As Dead We have nothing but
unra were already living in the
streets there are three border crossings
into Gaza two with Israel and one with
Egypt although Israel inspects all
people and goods coming in or out of the
territory through Egypt both countries
are accused of holding up Aid deliveries
CC did not want to open up the gate to
allow humanitarian material to get in I
talk to him I convince him to open the
gate the Egyptian government
vehemently denies
it as the war drags on un leaders have
described the volume of Aid entering
Gaza as a trickle in comparison to the
Sea of humanitarian need Veronica
Pedroza Al jazer for Inside
Story we will talk to our guests in a
moment but first let's listen to Fidel
araj who I spoke to earlier she's the
gender justice and Protection Officer of
the charity oxir Fidel joined me from
Rafa in southern Gaza where Israel is
threatening a large scale ground
offensive I began by asking her about
the humanitarian situation there the
humanitarian situation in Rafa is
worsening by the minute um we are
talking about a very uh limited
geographical area housing more than 100
1 million and a half idps uh most of
which uh are saying
intent um there is a very severe lack of
access to water drinking water domestic
water uh severe uh inability to access
food uh this all comes into uh a very
cold winter where the living conditions
are very
deteriorated um we have a very huge need
for medical care for health for Health
Care Facilities which are overburdened
to start with
and the burden on these facilities is
increasing especially after last night's
attacks that took tens of lives and left
um hundreds injured and even in more
grave situation um regarding their their
shelter many people lost their their
meager shelters last night and we
unfortunately we expect that to to
worsen even more in the upcoming days
and weeks if this is not
the Israeli Army is preparing for its
ground offensive in Rafa give us a sense
of the risks for the civilian population
if that operation starts we are fearing
uh for our lives basically then there's
the prospect of having to relocate yet
again uh to seek a safer place and as I
said before ra is very limited
geographically so there is barely any
place to go to that would be um away
from uh from that Brandon Kian way if it
happened Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu offered to promise to offer
Palestinians in Rafa a safe passage to
Northern areas would it make any
difference given the fact that in the
past those safe passages were bombarded
by the Israelis relentlessly everywhere
you walk in Raa you you feel you have
the feeling that tents spring from the
ground and and are erected as you walk
this is how crowded it is so I would
really like to see what what's a safe
passage will look like where would it
lead us I don't think it's possible at
all the Israel is under obligation to
comply with the international Court of
Justice's orders particularly when it
comes to allowing immediate and quick
aid into this trip as a worker there
could you give us a sense of the aid
which is now trickling into Gaza is it
enough actually it's nowhere near enough
it's um it's hardly a drop in the ocean
of all of the needs I'm I've been
working um as a humanitarian for the
past 18 years and to start with Gaza has
been under siege for 16 years and it's
always been a challenge to get um
supplies into Gaza but what we're
witnessing now what we're living now now
is
unprecedented we barely get anything we
barely could get any trucks of Aid f as
you said you've been working as Aid
worker for many many years in Gaza i'
would like to ask you a personal
question you have your own family have
your children what's next for you if the
ground Invasion starts in Rafa actually
it's not a very easy question to
answer since I've been asking it to
myself for the past month or so uh I've
been thinking I'm a mother of five kids
and of course I feel responsible for
their life for their safety but I really
can't decide what to do um I try to plan
to find a safer place or a less deadly
Place let's say because safer is very
exaggerated word I don't know actually
to be honest if I will find such a place
and if I find such a place how will I
manage a shelter what would I do um
build up a tent uh how will I move there
um will I be able to move for example
last night we thought it was a landing
care gy and I was faced with my children
waking up at 3:00 a.m. and they were
just panicking like let's move let's
move and I honestly froze I didn't know
how to move where the where the the the
strikes we coming from do I take the
risk to go in the streets and move or do
I stay and wait and and risk being hit
so it's very very difficulty question
that we keep asking ourselves every day
every day and we just hope that we that
they will manage someone will manage to
stop all of this before an actual ground
Invasion because it's really it seems
like the end of the line for everyone
here in Rafa
let's bring in our guests from New Haven
Connecticut we're joined by arim SE a
professor of international law at quin's
University and author of United Nations
and the question of Palestine and in
London is Chris GES former spokesperson
for Ona who is speaking to us in an
independent capacity welcome to the
program Rd Israel has until February 20
the3d to report to the
icj has done to comply with the six
orders it issued today we're putting
more emphasis on the humanitarian aspect
do you believe that Israel is doing all
it takes to ensure steady consistent
delivery of Aid into the strip well
thanks for having me Hashim uh in short
no uh since the provisional measures
order of the icj was issued on the 26th
of January there have been 17 massacres
committed in the Gaza Strip 2,000 killed
2,000 Palestinians killed of course had
obviously a severe intensification of
the situation in the South we now have
1.4 million Palestinians um pushed
towards the South uh on the border with
the Egyptian uh Sinai and the prospect
of uh permanent forcible transfer of
this community into Egypt uh either
through direct bomb bment uh and inertia
that you know that is compels that
result or over time through starvation
used as a method of War uh and the uh
cutting off of humanitarian Aid and
assistance to this community looms large
um the situation on the ground is is
tremendously difficult uh on the order
of a NECA of the sort that we saw in
1948 and
Beyond Chris you would expect that under
the orders issued Ed by the icj the
focus would be pretty much on delivering
Aid ensuring that the situation is
contained however Israel appears to be
now preparing for its ground offensive
United Nations Secretary General Antonio
G said and warned that the Israeli
Invasion would exponentially I'm quoting
him increase what is already a
humanitarian nightmare what would be
next for Gaza if that operation starts
well to be very clear we are already
seeing starvation on a mass scale Martin
Griffith the most senior humanitarian in
the UN system has said and this was
several weeks ago that 400,000 people
are literally starving and to be clear
starvation is a slow motion Massacre Ry
has mentioned the number of massacres
that we've seen since this provisional
measures order but the bigger Massac
is the starvation and to be clear those
member states who are presently
defunding unra are complicit in that
slow motion Massacre they were already
complicit in a violation of the genocide
convention which makes it an obligation
on state parties to prevent genocide the
clue is in the name the convention on
the prevention um and Punishment of
genocide but there are three other
illegalities first of all as Ry has
quite rightly said it's a violation of
the provisional measures um thirdly it
is a violation of international
humanitarian law which is very clear
that food cannot be used as a weapon of
war and there are many other by the way
IHL violations that we are now seeing
including Provisions for the protection
of civilians in time of war and very
fourthly it is a violation of
humanitarian principles neutrality and
impartiality which is why I say that the
um illogical illegal immoral defunding
of unra needs to be ended immediately
and the civilians need to be got out of
Harm's Way now you know this Israeli
offer to give them safe P passage to the
north we know what Israeli safe passage
means it means further killings on an
industrial scale what needs to happen is
that the netive Israel as the occupying
power needs to protect the population
which is not just under its protection
it's under its bombs it's committing
what the icj has called a plausible
genocide against 2.3 million people what
needs to happen is that Israel needs to
open up and give protection to these
people
immediately AI activists have been
saying that since the icj is there to
referee disputes between nations because
of the Relentless bombardment the
targeting of Healthcare facilities
ambulances the access roads this could
be a strong case for the IC to prosecute
Israeli
soldiers officials for atrocities
committed against the people of Gaza are
you of that view should that be a case
to be
prosecuted I am but we know that uh we
know that the office of the prosecutor
has a file opened he's investigating the
situation in Palestine sadly he's been
taking a horribly long time inordinately
so but all of the events that we've seen
unfold in in the occupied Gaza Strip and
indeed in occupied Palestinian territory
since 7 October and before are now
increasingly before his team in in ha um
and so there's no reason to not to
believe that the matter is more uh more
urgent uh for the office of the
prosecutor which which he should be
moving uh as soon as possible I think
I'd like to also offer the following um
there are about seven border crossings
of the Gaza Strip uh generally one into
Egypt and six others into Israel and the
point that was raised by Chris is an
extremely important one that is to say
if the Israelis are so concerned about
the million the million and a half
people or more in the Gaza Strip who may
be subjected to bombardment and want to
remove them somehow and provide them
with safe passage not only is the Nega
of the obvious place for them to go but
viewers need to understand that upwards
of about 80%
thereabouts of the population of the
Gaza Strip are themselves not from Gaza
they are Palestine refugees registered
with unra and they originate either
original refugees or their descendants
they originate from those refugees who
were ethnically cleansed in 1948 from
areas in what is now Israel including
the neev and so it wouldn't be out of
the ordinary for the Israelis to allow
those people back to their homes indeed
it's a requirement under international
law for the Israelis to allow those
people to return to their homes and in
this case under bombardment the world is
on its head all a a result of the
complete
disproportionate unnecessary response to
the October 7 attack against Israel
Chris the against guess the backdrop of
the apocalyptic situation that you can
see unfold in Gaza activists have been
saying basically that you need more than
500 trucks to be Crossing into Gaza on a
daily basis to cope with the massive
demands of the people now US President
Biden took the World by surprise when he
said it was him who convinced Egyptian
president CCE to open the Rafa Crossing
then the Israelis are saying at the at
the same time they have their own unit
the Kat which liaz is with the United
Nations when it comes to the delivery of
Aid and which basically says that the
reason why we are uh we are being
meticulous is that we'd like to ensure
that food deliveries don't end up being
in the hands of Hamas practically we're
talking about people who have to wait
weeks and weeks and mons because the
mechanism itself is not working is it
politically motivat
thing if that question's addressed to me
hasham I would say an unequivocal yes of
course this is all politically motivated
and to be very clear this is the
political agenda of the far fascist
right in Israel you don't have to be a
conspiracy theorist you can just Google
it look at the things that are being
said about ethnically cleansing Gaza
about destroying um life in Gaza
preventing um any kind of return to Gaza
so make no mistake what lies behind this
is the notion that if you destroy anra
if you destroy Gaza then somehow you're
getting rid of the Palestinian refugees
and their right of return now to be
clear on the getting rid of unra it is
the UN General Assembly which hands down
unr's mandate as a an organ of the a
subsidiary or organ of the general
assembly and only the general assembly
can change Unis mandate um but secondly
the Palestine refugees are people they
have inalienable rights both group
individual and Collective rights and
those rights uh also include the right
political rights of self-determination
of course as refugees they can make
three choices including the right of
return integration where they are or
safe passage to a third country so you
know getting rid of unra forcing these
refugees to another part of the world
that does not get rid of the big problem
here for the Israeli fascistic right
which is that they are individuals they
are people with group and Collective
rights and getting rid of unra or
pushing them out displacing them to some
other part that doesn't change the fact
that they are people with rights the
right to dignity the right to Justice
the right to accountability the right to
prosperity and the right to
self-determination and that remains
they're h human beings aie you see the
pictures of the people suffering in Gaza
and then the question begs itself once
again who is to be held accountable for
the uh the slow delivery of Aid into
into the strip is it the isra Army is it
the the neighbors is it the
International Community or is it just
simply bureaucratic
hurdles yeah I mean in the first
instance Hashim it would be the Israeli
uh as occupying power in the Gaza Strip
uh they have an obligation to this
sounds rather odd in the circumstances
but their obligations under
International are to protect the
civilian Palestinian population in the
Gaza Strip not bombard them
indiscriminately and use starvation
against them as a tool of War so in the
first instance under international law
it's the Israelis who have the
obligation to protect that population
including through the provision of
humanitarian Aid sufficient to scale and
so on as per not only the icj
provisional measures order of 26 January
but general public international law law
uh uh bulr occupation the Fourth Geneva
Convention and so on but in addition to
that you have third States who have an
obligation to quote ensure that Israel
respect the terms of humanitarian law
common article one of the four Geneva
conventions as well as under the
provisional measures order of 26 uh
January they have an obligation as Chris
said earlier to prevent the commission
of genocide and that means providing
means uh and ways to ensure greater
humanitarian support to the Palestinian
people in the Gaza Strip not less and
therefore the defunding of unra runs
counter to their obligations under the
genocide convention I just wanted to
offer the following based on what Chris
had just said though we have evidence
three days after the the provisional
measures order uh was issued by the
court we have clear evidence in the
public realm of a conference taking
place uh by the Israeli farri in
Jerusalem called the quote unquote
return to Gaza conference at which um at
least I think 11 Ministers of government
appeared and 15 members of of government
uh um of cabinet forgive me they were
there and in this conference there are
open calls by multiple members of the of
the Israeli uh uh body politic as well
as governing structures saying that
basically we want to return that is
return Israeli settlers to the Gaza
Strip after we ethnically cleanse the
Gaza Strip lost in these four-month
period of coverage over the Gaza Strip
is the simple truth that Israel is using
the events of 7 October as a pretext to
ethnically cleanse 2.2 million
Palestinians or as many of them as
possible out of the Gaza Strip This is a
strategic goal of Israel they've been
open and public about their interests in
doing so and their actions on the ground
their mil Ary actions and so on now the
subject of a provisional measures order
under the genocide Convention of the icj
Bel or demonstrate all of that so the
the story really is about how to Stave
off to stop the ethnic cleansing of the
Gaza Strip and even worse the possible
genocide of the people there Chris the
when you look at the orders issued by
the icj it was it was I mean obvious
that two key components were facturing
when it comes to the decision-making
process basically the they wanted to
make sure that there was no genocidal
intent and that Aid goes to uh
Gaza what's next for gazans and this is
why I'm not ask you about Ona how do you
see the future for Gaza now that the
humanitarian Aid Lifeline onra hangs by
a
thread well first of all on this
question of the ICC the icj I see
accountability as a very broad canvas so
yes there's the icj which adjudicates
disputes between states there's the ICC
which can bring cases against
individuals but there's also the work
being done in National jurisdictions
just today we had or was it yesterday we
had a ruling in Holland over um arms
supplies um it's clear that there's
economic pressures turkey recently
downgraded the economic relationship um
with Israel so there are many other
things going on um across the board I
think as far as the people in Gaza um
are concerned I think the future is
Bleak and I think that while you have a
situation where the International
Community countries like my own Britain
the United States Canada are prepared a
on the one hand to continue supplying
weapons as well as diplomatic and
political support through the United
Nations we've seen this in the security
Council also but at the same time defund
the very organization established by um
the United Nations to bring humanitarian
relief and assistance to these people
then I think there is um a real problem
but to be clear the Palestinians been
here before these are people with
extraordinary resilience I hate to use
that word resilience in the face of a
plausible genocide but the fact is that
you cannot rob a people of their dignity
you cannot rob a people of their
identity and their Destiny frankly and
you cannot do that simply by subjecting
them to what's going on they will
outlive this terrible terrible as it
might seem at the moment uh since both
of you mentioned the moral legal
obligations of the third parties I'll go
to AI first AI South Africa lawyers are
hoping to return back uh at the end of
this month to the icj and say that
basically given the record of the icg
refering disputes between nations there
is the potential for them to say wait a
second if the Americans the Brits the
the the the
Europeans are not able to use their
leverage uh with the israelies in terms
of telling them it's about time to stop
the war it's about time to deliver Aid
that could be a case for them to
prosecute those Nations for that
inaction and not willing to move forward
could that be a practical case to
follow yes uh in short yes uh as I said
earlier all signatories to the uh all
parties to the genocide convention have
an obligation to prevent and the moment
that they were put on notice by the
court on the 26th of January of the
plausibility of genocide taking place is
the moment that based on the Court's
jurus Prudence they their their
obligation to prevent is triggered now
to the ENT that those third States uh
Canada and and others uh the UK France
and others Canada the United States do
not take effective measures to prevent
they expose themselves to to to uh
possible cases brought by other States
including South Africa but not
exclusively to South Africa other
parties to the convention can bring
claims against them before the court
basically saying that you failed in your
duty to prevent the Nick ragins for
instance have have now attempted to join
or rather to intervene in the South
African matter uh with Israel that's
just an example so um it is possible
that you can have further litigation
before the court it you know it would
depend on this third state in question
some of these states have sort of
objected to the uh uh jurisdiction of
the Court uh with declarations submitted
before the court that predate the the
South Africa matter but there are some
states who are exposed um that is that
is a possibility absolutely thank you
thank you unfortunately we're running
out of uh time I really appreciate your
time r m and Chris gunnes thank you very
much
indeed and thank you too for watching
you can see the program again anytime by
visiting our website aljazeera.com for
further discussion go to our Facebook
page that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory you can also
join the conversation on X our handle is
AJ Insight story from has and the entire
team here in Doha bye for
[Music]
now